Group algorithms and space-group symmetries for `Lattice` (#724)
netket/netket: CHANGELOG.md

* Unless you specify the QGT implementation you wish to use with SR, we use an automatic heuristic based
  on your model and the solver to pick one. 
  This might affect SR performance. [#674](https://github.com/netket/netket/pull/674)

> * `netket.utils.group` provides utilities for geometrical and permutation groups. `Lattice` (and its specialisations like `Grid`) use these to automatically construct the space groups of lattices, as well as their character tables for generating wave functions with broken symmetry. [#724](https://github.com/netket/netket/pull/724)

Reviewer: cc @femtobit 
Except rare cases (like `MPI`, or `configs`) I'd like to avoid having users reach into `netket.utils`.
It's more of an utility for us writing the inner netket than for end-users. 

I am seriously thinking that this could be it's own module.

--

In any case, @attila-i-szabo Do end-users needs to use functions from `netket.utils.group` to do something, or they are just fine with using the classes they are given and the methods on the class?

Reviewer 2: You could argue that one only really needs `group` for constructing symmetry groups not provided out of the box. OTOH, people _do_ have to work with objects from `group` (such as specifically `PermutationGroup`, `Permutation`, ...).

The question is maybe: Do we consider "adding symmetries beyond what we provide" to be a end user thing?

Reviewer: not for now.
Maybe in the future once the api is stabilised.
But not now.

So let's keep in in utils

* `nk.optimizer.sr.SRLazyCG` and `nk.optimizer.sr.SRLazyGMRES` have been deprecated and will soon be removed.
* Parts of the `Lattice` API have been overhauled, with deprecations of several methods in favor of a consistent usage of `Lattice.position` for real-space location of sites and `Lattice.basis_coords` for location of sites in terms of basis vectors. `Lattice.sites` has been added, which provides a sequence of `LatticeSite` objects combining all site properties. Furthermore, `Lattice` now provides lookup of sites from their position via `id_from_position` using a hashing scheme that works across periodic boundaries. [#703](https://github.com/netket/netket/pull/703) [#715](https://github.com/netket/netket/pull/715)
* The `Grid` API has been retired in favour of specialised `Lattice` constructors ([#724](https://github.com/netket/netket/pull/724)). As a result,
    * The `color_edges` constructor switch has been removed for the time being. We plan to reverse this later.
    * `planar_rotation()` and `axis_reflection()` are dropped. Their functionality can be achieved by supplying `point_group()` with the appropriate geometrical point group.

>     * `space_group()` and `lattice_group()` are renamed to the correct terms `point_group()` and `space_group()`. Due to the overlap in the names, deprecation warnings are not provided. Unlike the original `Grid` API, `point_group()` only returns symmetries that leave the origin in place.

Reviewer 2: I think the symmetry-related methods were not even part of `v3.0b1` (our first beta version), only one of the `v3.0b1.post#` releases. Not sure if we actually need to add a changelog entry in that case. (Too many entries relating to short-lived features few people have even seen can also be confusing.) @PhilipVinc ?

(This does not apply to the first point about `Grid`, which I think is helpful.)

Reviewer: Indeed, those were never released so they shouldn't go in breaking changes. Rather in new features (just one bullet element about all those things, and a short description)

By the way. I don't understand what happened to colored edges...

I am on holiday so I'll properly review tomorrow.

Author: > Indeed, those were never released so they shouldn't go in breaking changes. Rather in new features (just one bullet element about all those things, and a short description)

Does this refer to `space_group` and `lattice_group`? Or also `planar_rotations()`?

> By the way. I don't understand what happened to colored edges...

`Lattice` doesn't support them because the only way it takes edges is through KDTree. It will require a more general interface for supplying edges (while keeping KDTree as the default)

Reviewer 2: > Does this refer to space_group and lattice_group? Or also planar_rotations()?

Both.

  inside the closure or `functools.partial` passed as `solver` argument.
* `nk.optimizer.sr.SRLazyCG` and `nk.optimizer.sr.SRLazyGMRES` have been deprecated and will soon be removed.
* Parts of the `Lattice` API have been overhauled, with deprecations of several methods in favor of a consistent usage of `Lattice.position` for real-space location of sites and `Lattice.basis_coords` for location of sites in terms of basis vectors. `Lattice.sites` has been added, which provides a sequence of `LatticeSite` objects combining all site properties. Furthermore, `Lattice` now provides lookup of sites from their position via `id_from_position` using a hashing scheme that works across periodic boundaries. [#703](https://github.com/netket/netket/pull/703) [#715](https://github.com/netket/netket/pull/715)

> * The `Grid` API has been retired in favour of specialised `Lattice` constructors. Since Lattice does not yet support coloured edges, the `color_edges` constructor switch has been removed for the time being. [#724](https://github.com/netket/netket/pull/724)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `graph.Grid` class has been removed. {ref}`graph.Grid` will now return an instance of {ref}`graph.Lattice` supporting the same API but with new functionalities related to spatial symmetries. The `color_edges` optional keyword argument has been removed without deprecation and is slated for reintroduction in a future release. [#724](https://github.com/netket/netket/pull/724)
```

@femtobit `color_edges` was present in 2.1? I think it was.
@attila-i-szabo We tend to deprecate instead of hard-removing features unless really needed. 
I understand that we cannot support all the new fancy things inside of Lattice,  but... do we still have a way to work with coloured edges now or if we merge your PR we completely loose support for those? 
We could also make it so that `graph.grid` constructs a lattice if no `color_edges` is passed, and returns an old `graph.grid`+ deprecation warning if it's given color_edges.

cc @gcarleo which I think won't be in favour of this.

Reviewer 2: > @femtobit color_edges was present in 2.1? I think it was.

No, I added it as part of v3. There were not colored edges in v2.1.

In fact, there was no `Grid` (no `Chain` or `Square`) in v2. Back in the old days, we even had to create our non-`Hypercube` grids by hand.

Reviewer: ok, that's good for me.

Author: I had some chat with @femtobit about this. The big problem with the `Lattice` API is that it's too strongly tied to building the edges with KDTree. Just about any cond-mat simulation library lets you build lattices by specifying the edges yourself in a format like `(site1, site2, lattice_vector_offset) -> colour`. We need to support something like this, because it covers every possible use case. Having said that, autodetecting nearest neighbours is nice, so I'd keep that as a default behaviour if edges aren't supplied.

Author: @PhilipVinc @gcarleo IMO there's no point in developing two completely different APIs to do the same thing in parallel, and we're better off if we provide the `color_edges` feature for `Grid` by sorting the more general issue with `Lattice` first.

Reviewer 2: Yes, that's something for future work.

Though note that you can mostly specify the graph with bonds and colors yourself with `CustomGraph` (and since we can pass different graphs to operators on the same Hilbert space, one can construct different graphs for different operators as well). The only things that is lacking is a notion of site location, but that one can keep in an underlying lattice. Maybe we can add an example doing this to get different bond operators in `Examples` for 3.0.

Author: > Though note that you can mostly specify the graph with bonds and colors yourself with CustomGraph (and since we can pass different graphs to operators on the same Hilbert space, one can construct different graphs for different operators as well). The only things that is lacking is a notion of site location, but that one can keep in an underlying lattice. Maybe we can add an example doing this to get different bond operators in Examples for 3.0.

This sounds like a very bad antipattern and not something I'd like to advertise (although users will have to figure out something like this if they want to use Netket for serious work)

  inside the closure or `functools.partial` passed as `solver` argument.
* `nk.optimizer.sr.SRLazyCG` and `nk.optimizer.sr.SRLazyGMRES` have been deprecated and will soon be removed.
* Parts of the `Lattice` API have been overhauled, with deprecations of several methods in favor of a consistent usage of `Lattice.position` for real-space location of sites and `Lattice.basis_coords` for location of sites in terms of basis vectors. `Lattice.sites` has been added, which provides a sequence of `LatticeSite` objects combining all site properties. Furthermore, `Lattice` now provides lookup of sites from their position via `id_from_position` using a hashing scheme that works across periodic boundaries. [#703](https://github.com/netket/netket/pull/703) [#715](https://github.com/netket/netket/pull/715)

> * The `graph.Grid` class has been removed. {ref}`graph.Grid` will now return an instance of {ref}`graph.Lattice` supporting the same API but with new functionalities related to spatial symmetries. The `color_edges` optional keyword argument has been removed without deprecation and is slated for reintroduction in a future release. [#724](https://github.com/netket/netket/pull/724)

Reviewer 3: the `color_edges` was more of an experiment than something really useful when we introduced it, I think nobody would complain if we remove it forever?

Reviewer 2: I think we can indeed leave out the "is slated for reintroduction in a future release" part. We'll want to add some support for colored edges later, but that should probably be done with a more flexible interface anyways.
